Monthly spellcheck fixes (#1075)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: analyses/cell-type-wilms-tumor-06/notebook/07_combined_annotation_across_samples_exploration.Rmd

)
```

## Introduction

> The aim is to combine label transfer and CNV inference to annotate Wilms tumor samples in SCPCP000006. The proposed annotation will be based on the combination of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aim is to combine label transfer and CNV inference to annotate Wilms tumor samples in SCPCP000006.
The proposed annotation will be based on the combination of:
```

Author: oooof, will do. thanks!!

Author: 🤦🏻‍♀️

### Output files

> The report will be saved in the `notebook` directory. The final annotation file `SCPCP000006-annotations.tsv` will be saved in the `results` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The report will be saved in the `notebook` directory.
The final annotation file `SCPCP000006-annotations.tsv` will be saved in the `results` directory.
```

metadata <- read.table(sample_metadata_file, sep = "\t", header = TRUE)
```

> We extracted from the pre-processed and labeled `Seurat` object from `results/{sample_id}/06_infercnv_HMM-i3_{sample_id}_reference-{reference}.rds`. the following information per cell:

Reviewer: This sentence was quite unclear... not sure I fixed it correctly.
```suggestion
We extracted the following information from the pre-processed and labeled `Seurat` object at `results/{sample_id}/06_infercnv_HMM-i3_{sample_id}_reference-{reference}.rds`:
```

-   the predicted compartment in `fetal_kidney_predicted.compartment` and `fetal_kidney_predicted.compartment.score`

-   the predicted cell type in `fetal_kidney_predicted.cell_type` and `fetal_kidney_predicted.cell_type.score`

-   the sample identifier in `sample_id`

> -   the CNV `{dupli|loss}` estimation per chromosome {i} and arm `{p|q}`: `has_{dupli|loss}_chr{i}{p|q}`, in 1 to 22

Reviewer: I'm not sure what the last clause is here, I assume that it is supposed to say `i` in 1-22?
```suggestion
-   the CNV `{dupli|loss}` estimation per chromosome `{i}` and arm `{p|q}`: `has_{dupli|loss}_chr{i}{p|q}`, in 1 to 22
```

For those samples, the annotations based on `infercnv` cannot be trusted. 
To avoid any confusion in the following steps of the analysis, we decided to force the annotation of the entire samples to `unknown`.

```{r fig.width=10, fig.height=10, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
cell_type_df$first.level_annotation[cell_type_df$sample_id %in% none_reference_samples] <- "unknown"
```

### Second level annotation

#### Normal cells

- Normal cells from the `fetal nephron` compartment must be normal kidney cells.
- Normal cells from the `stroma` compartment must be normal stroma cells.
- Immune and endothelial cells have been already identified by label transfer.

#### Cancer cells

Wilms tumor cancer cells can be:

- *cancer stroma*: We define as *cancer stroma* all cancer cells from the stroma compartment.
- *blastema*: We defined as *blastema* every cancer cell that has a `fetal_kidney_predicted.cell_type == mesenchymal cell`. 
We know that these *mesenchymal* cells are cells from the cap mesenchyme that are not expected to be in a mature kidney. 

> These blastema cells should express higher `CITED1` and/or `NCAM1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These blastema cells should express higher *CITED1* and/or *NCAM1*.
```

wrap_plots(gain_profile, loss_profile, ncol = 1) + plot_layout(widths = CNV_profile_gain$Size)
```

> Comparing with the profile in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1), we identified important CNV known to play a role in Wilms tumor, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comparing with the profile in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1), we identified important CNV known to play a role in Wilms tumor, including:
```

- *chr8q*, *chr12*, *chr13*, *chr18q* gains
- *chr11q*, *chr16*, *chr17q* loss

However, we spotted some differences:

> - We couldn't detect any *chr4q* loss as described in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We couldn't detect any *chr4q* loss as described in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).
```

> - We identified 2 losses in *chr5* and *chr6* that do not show up in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We identified 2 losses in *chr5* and *chr6* that do not show up in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).
```

These may be `infercnv` induced false-positive CNV.

Our major concern is the pattern of the *chr1*. 

> We do see a tendency of *chr1p* loss and *chr1q* gain but it is not as pronounced as in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1). 
> *chr1q* gain is however one of the most promising predictive marker of Wilms tumor outcome ([Nelson et al, Current Opinion in Pediatrics (2020)](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7919941/)). 
> It is however important to notice that the profile shown in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1) derived from SIOP samples that have been pre-treated with chemotherapy, while samples in the dataset are enriched in `upfront resection` samples that haven't been pre-treated, according to the COG protocol. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do see a tendency of *chr1p* loss and *chr1q* gain but it is not as pronounced as in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).
*chr1q* gain is however one of the most promising predictive marker of Wilms tumor outcome ([Nelson et al. (2020)](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7919941/)).
It is however important to notice that the profile shown in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1) derived from SIOP samples that have been pre-treated with chemotherapy, while samples in the dataset are enriched in `upfront resection` samples that haven't been pre-treated, according to the COG protocol.
```

So far, we do not know how the pre-operative chemotherapy impact the clonal selection of specific CNV.

### Mean of the percentage of cells with CNV in a specific chromosome arm per clinical relevant group

#### `vital_status`

> As described in [Nelson et al, Current Opinions in Pediatrics (2020)](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7919941/), [Phelps et al, Children (2018)](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6262554/) and [Zheng et al, Frontiers in Oncology (2023)](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/oncology/articles/10.3389/fonc.2023.1137346/full), LOH at *chr1p*, *chr11p* and *chr16q* as well as *chr1q* gain are prognostic factors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in [Nelson et al. (2020)](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7919941/), [Phelps et al. (2018)](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6262554/) and [Zheng et al. (2023)](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/oncology/articles/10.3389/fonc.2023.1137346/full), LOH at *chr1p*, *chr11p* and *chr16q* as well as *chr1q* gain are prognostic factors.
```

Here we aim to see if we identify CNV associated with poorer prognosis.

```{r fig.height=15, fig.width=20, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_BoxPlot_mean(df = cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "vital_status", comparison = c("Alive", "Expired"))
```

In our study, we validate the association of *chr1q* gain, *chr11q* loss and *chr14q* loss with poorer prognosis.

##### `treatment`

> As we don't know the effect of the treatment on the selection of cells with CNV, it is difficult to compare our CNV profile with the one in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we don't know the effect of the treatment on the selection of cells with CNV, it is difficult to compare our CNV profile with the one in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).
```

We those check the repartition of CNV in samples that have been pre-treated (i.e `Resection post chemotherapy`) with samples that have been removed surgically before any treatment (i.e `Upfront resection`).

```{r fig.height=15, fig.width=20, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_BoxPlot_mean(df = cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "treatment", comparison = c("Upfront resection", "Resection post chemotherapy"))
```

> Our analysis suggest that there is indeed an enrichment in cells with CNV after chemotherapy, including a tendency of more *chr1q* gain samples after chemotherapy. This could explain some of the differences observed between our mean CNV profile and the one published in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our analysis suggest that there is indeed an enrichment in cells with CNV after chemotherapy, including a tendency of more *chr1q* gain samples after chemotherapy. This could explain some of the differences observed between our mean CNV profile and the one published in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1).
```

do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000081237")
```

> Immune cells are well annotated based on `PTPRC` expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Immune cells are well annotated based on *PTPRC* expression.
```

#### Endothelium, `VWF` expression

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=5, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000110799")
```

> Endothelial cells are well annotated based on `VWF` expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Endothelial cells are well annotated based on *VWF* expression.
```

#### Stroma

(\*) To the best of our knowledge, there is no Wilms tumor specific marker of stroma cells. 
They should express in some extend similar markers as normal stromal cells including *VIM*, *THY1* and *COL6A3*.

##### `Vimentin` expression

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=5, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000026025")
```

*VIM* do not seem to be neither specific nor universal.

##### `COL6A3` expression

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=5, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000163359")
```

*COL6A3* expression is higher in Wilms tumor stroma cells and expressed across a wider range of samples.

##### `THY1` expression

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=5, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000154096")
```

> *THY1* do not seem to be neither specific nor universal.

Author: ```suggestion
*THY1* expression does not seem to be either specific or universal.
```

#### Blastema

(\*) To the best of our knowledge, there is no Wilms tumor specific and universal (i.e. expressed by all cells in every sample) marker of blastema cells. 

> We expect however blastema cells to express higher levels of stemness markers such as `CITED1`, `SIX1/2`, `NCAM1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect however blastema cells to express higher levels of stemness markers such as *CITED1*, *SIX1/2*, *NCAM1*.
```

##### `CITED1` expression

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=5, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000125931")
```

> Blastema cells are enriched in `CITED1+` cells, but some samples do not express it at all.

Author: ```suggestion
Blastema cells are enriched in *CITED1+* cells, but some samples do not express it at all.
```

##### `NCAM1` expression

```{r fig.width=20, fig.height=5, out.width='100%', results='asis'}
do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000149294")
```

> `NCAM1` seems to be more cancer specific and broadly expressed among samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*NCAM1* seems to be more cancer specific and broadly expressed among samples.
```

do_Feature_mean(cell_type_df_sub, group.by = "second.level_annotation", feature = "ENSG00000039068")
```

> As expected, epithelial cells express higher expression of `CDH1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As expected, epithelial cells express higher expression of *CDH1*.
```

write_tsv(annotations_table, annotations_tsv)
```

Confirm how many samples we have annotations for:

```{r}
length(unique(annotations_table$scpca_sample_id))
```

## Conclusion

- Combining label transfer and CNV inference we have produced draft annotations for 35/40 Wilms tumor samples in SCPCP000006. 
We decided not to annotate samples for which the `infercnv` couldn't be run with a normal reference, as we don't trust the results in that case and want to avoid misclassification (`SCPCS000177`, `SCPCS000180`, `SCPCS000181`, `SCPCS000190`, `SCPCS000197`).

> - The mean CNV profile of the Wilms tumor cohort seems reasonable in regards to the one published in [Cresswell et al, bioRxiv (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The mean CNV profile of the Wilms tumor cohort seems reasonable in regards to the one published in [Cresswell et al. (2024)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.04.610994v1). 
```
